---
title: 'The Malaria Lab'
subtitle: 'Lab 9 (required) • March 15, 2023'
date: 2019-01-03 00:00:00
description: Ready to tackle one of world's deadliest pathogens?  Using data collected throughout the 48hr red blood cell cycle, you'll be tasked with putting together a publication-quality figure that best captures your main findings.
featured_image: '/images/plasmoRBC.png'
---

<div style="text-align: right"> Image credit: Khrystyna Kozyuk </div>

## Corresponding lecture

[Lecture 8 – Differential gene expression](https://diytranscriptomics.com/project/lecture-08)

[Lecture 9 – Module Identification](https://diytranscriptomics.com/project/lecture-09)

## Description

You're tasked with studying gene expression in *Plasmodium falciparum*, a single-celled protozoan parasite that infects human red blood cells (RBCs) and is the causative agent of malaria, one of the deadliest infectious diseases on the planet.  After invading an RBC, parasites progress through a 48 hour developmental cycle before rupturing the cell and invading a new one.  To understand how parasite gene expression changes during this cycle, you infect RBCs *in vitro* and isolate RNA every 8 hours for 48 hours straight.  As you're finishing the experiment (and very much looking forward to sleeping), your PI asks if you can put together a figure for a last-minute grant submission.

### Before you start

* We already mapped the raw reads to the *P. falciparum* reference transcriptome ahead of time.  You should've already downloaded this data to your laptop before the start of the lab, but [here it is again](https://www.dropbox.com/s/av8uh0o64jjfefl/malaria.zip?dl=0) just in case.
* These data were produced by [Manuel Llinás’ lab](http://llinaslab.psu.edu/) and are reported in their 2020 BMC Genomics paper: [Refining the transcriptome of the human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum using amplification-free RNA-seq](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12864-020-06787-5).
* Please include a figure legend on your final figure.


### Tips

* Don't worry about annotations or summarizing data to gene-level, just read the data into R at the transcript-level
* There are different ways that you could set-up the model matrix, so you'll have to choose an approach and move forward
* You'll use the Step scripts 1, 2, 3, 5 and 6 for challenge.
* Think about what makes a good figure and use your data to tell a story!
* Feel free to include illustrations/schematics if useful.

## Extended learning

* While filtering/normalizing/plotting this data, you may have noticed an odd pattern in the distributions that you plotted.  Why do you think this is, and what (if anything) could you do to deal with this?
* What do you think of PCA plot, and what does this tell you about the biology of the Malaria erythrocytic cycle?
* Did the small multiples plot of the PCA results give you any additional insight into sources of variance in this dataset?
* In the solution script below, we use a model matrix with no intercept, and then rely on our contrast matrix to compare each timepoint to timepoint zero.  This probably isn't the smartest approach, and the Limma manual spends a great deal of time explaining how to set-up more elegant designs for timeseries studies.  Can you make a better design that identifies more differentially expressed genes?


## Solution

Download **[this script](http://DIYtranscriptomics.github.io/Code/files/malarialab_solution.R)** to see how we can work through this data.

The videos below may help you understand the code.

### Solution - part 1

<iframe src="https://player.vimeo.com/video/424040965" width="640" height="268" frameborder="0" allow="autoplay; fullscreen" allowfullscreen></iframe>

### Solution - part 2

<iframe src="https://player.vimeo.com/video/424040328" width="640" height="268" frameborder="0" allow="autoplay; fullscreen" allowfullscreen></iframe>
