---
title: 'Using generative AI to supercharge your coding'
subtitle: 'Lab 8 (required) • March 20, 2024'
date: 2019-01-04 00:00:00
description: Artificial Intelligence is revolutionizing how we interact with code.  In this lab, we'll review the solution for the last lab ('Global Animal Trade'), but will use AI to guide us.  I'll demonstrate how you can use the AI 'pair programmer' called Github Copilot to much more rapidly and seemlessly start new coding projects.
featured_image: '/images/llm_midjourney.png'
---

<div style="text-align: right"> Image credit: It's an AI lab, so seems only fitting that this image was produced with Midjourney model version 5.2. Prompt was 'artistic interpretation of a large language model for coding'. </div>

## Corresponding lecture

There is no corresponding lecture.

## Description

When OpenAI debuted its now famous ChatGPT on November 30th, 2022, it took the world by storm.   In the short time since, OpenAI has led the rapid development of large language models (LLM) and generative AI for a range of applications.  One clear place where AI and LLMs excel is in coding.  The [Codex LLM created by OpenAI](https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.03374) is trained on Github code and a production version of this tool is available as [Github Copilot](https://github.com/features/copilot).  In this lab, I'll demonstrate how you can use Copilot as a 'pair programmer', allowing you much more rapidly and seemlessly start new coding projects.

We'll spend the first 1/2 of this lab discussing the solution for the LEMIS lab from last week, and learn to use Copilot in the process.  Then, for the second 1/2 of the class, we'll discuss and begin the lab for next week.

## What you'll need to get started

1. Copilot is free for students and teachers, but getting access to it can be a little confusing.  I've put together step-by-step instructions **[here](https://protocols.hostmicrobe.org/copilot)**.

2. [Download this stripped down version of the solutions script from out lab last week](). Note, this 'script' has only comments...no code.  With Copilot turned on in RStudio, I'll demo how we can analyze the LEMIS dataset and answer the questions from last week's lab using Copilot.